# Spending Waves
The Scientific Key To Predicting Market Behavior for the Next 20 Years

In the rough and tumble world of business, we are conditioned not to think about things like “destiny.” In America, you make your own luck, and those of us with the best ideas and the best execution, rise to the top. It is the American dream that good ideas and hard work are rewarded with material success.

The majority of small businesses fail within five years of their founding. The most cited reason is a lack of investment capital, but the real reason is often a lot simpler: Many businesses fail due to a misunderstanding of their target market. But even if you do understand your core market, that may not be enough. It’s an important first step, but even if you understand your market perfectly well, you can still see your business swept away by an unstoppable wave of changing demographics.

Harley-Davidson had a fantastic run supplying its hogs to Baby Boomer men as they went through this stage of their lives. But then, suddenly, it all came crashing to a halt. Harley has had a terrible time growing its sales in the post-2008 economy and not just because unemployment is high or credit is tight. As Alex Taylor wrote in the September 17, 2010 edition of Fortune, Harley-Davidson is “struggling against a foe that not even cost-cutting or brand loyalty can overcome: demographics. Its current owners are getting old, and not enough younger ones are coming up behind them.” 3

Harley-Davidson had a fantastic run supplying its hogs to Baby Boomer men as they went through this stage of their lives. But then, suddenly, it all came crashing to a halt. Harley has had a terrible time growing its sales in the post-2008 economy and not just because unemployment is high or credit is tight. As Alex Taylor wrote in the September 17, 2010 edition of Fortune, Harley-Davidson is “struggling against a foe that not even cost-cutting or brand loyalty can overcome: demographics. Its current owners are getting old, and not enough younger ones are coming up behind them.”

For starters, it’s going to be expensive. Th e cost to raise a child from birth to age 17 is $368,000 for an urban, educated couple, according to U.S. government estimates.

This is changing, as high costs are forcing companies to be less generous, and Americans will be spending more on their families’ health care going forward.

By The New York Times estimates, the cost to raise kids is closer to $700,000 per child and, again, this doesn ’ t include college. 4 It also doesn ’ t include socialized costs such as the taxes you pay for public schools.

For most Americans, this will happen sometime between the ages of 45 and 50, or more precisely at age 46, on average. And for higher-income Americans, that age is a little higher. The top 10% of income earners peak in their spending at 50–51, and the top 1% around 53. Remember this range — it’s going to come in handy in a minute.

the Immigration-Adjusted Birth Index, one of the main building blocks of HS Dent research. Th ere is no rocket science here; this graph is nothing more than the annual live births in the United States adjusted for immigration. Immigrants are added to the index in the year they were born in their respective home country. So, a 30-year-old immigrant who comes to the United States in 2013 shows up as a birth in 1983.

That is our situation today, and it’s not getting better any time soon.

Debt makes it possible to purchase things today that would normally have been purchased at some point in the future. Debt is a facilitator that turns latent demand into real consumption. So, it makes the booms much, much bigger than they would have been. Th e fl ip side of this is that it makes the bust much, much worse. In our present case, not only have the Baby Boomers naturally slowed their spending due to the consumer life cycle, they are also paying down the debts from the three-decade boom.

It’s hard to run a business in a defl ationary environment. Your customers have little urgency to buy — and even less incentive to buy on credit — because they know that prices will be lower if they just wait awhile. Once defl ation sets in, it can be something of a self-fulfi lling prophecy. Prices fall because we expect them to fall. And this works its way all the way up the supply chain. If the retailer has to lower its prices, then so do its suppliers. It’s an absolute nightmare for anyone running a business.

Japan did not have a post-war baby boom on the scale of America’s. So Japan’s Spending Wave peaked long before ours, in 1989 (Japanese spending peaks around age 47). And what followed in Japan is exactly what you should expect in an overleveraged economy that depended heavily on one large generation that had already peaked in spending. The situation was made more extreme by an over-leveraged, over-indebted population, corporate sector, and banking sector, but Japan’s slow-motion depression would have happened in any event. The demographic story had already been written. But surely it can’t get that bad here. What about Bernanke’s quantitative easing? And what about all of that government stimulus we’ve been paying for? Surely trillion-dollar deficits count for something, right? As the Japanese crisis wore on, the Bank of Japan cut interest rates from 6% to zero, giving money away in the hopes that someone would spend it. Sound familiar? In the standard formula, lowering interest rates is supposed to boost consumption and investment. But it didn’t quite work out like that. Interest rates dropped, but savings remained high. Consumer spending stayed flat and then fell. New investment in productive assets stalled; Japanese businesses already had more than enough capacity. Japan did not stop with central bank monetary policy. The government launched countless fiscal stimulus programs, most of which caused a brief blip in growth but led to no lasting effect. The once fiscally conservative Japanese government went on the largest public works spending spree in history, boosting its budget deficits and government debts to levels rarely seen in developed countries.

T wenty years after the bubble burst, Japan is still struggling with deflation. We won’t have 20 years of deflation here; I expect us to return to “normal” inflation by early next decade. But that is still a decade away , and in the meantime we still have to operate in a rough economy

As I wrote in The Great Crash Ahead, deflation is not an equal-opportunity destroyer. It comes once in a lifetime in the longer-term business cycle, and it determines which businesses are going to survive and which businesses are going to fail. It shakes out the weak and the unprepared, but it also makes room for the stronger competitors to grow and gain market share.

As I wrote in The Great Crash Ahead, deflation is not an equal-opportunity destroyer. It comes once in a lifetime in the longer-term business cycle, and it determines which businesses are going to survive and which businesses are going to fail. It shakes out the weak and the unprepared, but it also makes room for the stronger competitors to grow and gain market share. My goal is to make you one of those survivors.

And to this list I would add one final addition. If your business is particularly at risk to a decline in your core customer demographic, consider radically changing the direction of your company or starting a new business altogether. The next 7–10 years will be some of the most challenging in your career, but the foundations you lay today will put you in position to prosper in the global boom ahead.

Think back to the section above where I laid out the rationale for the Immigration-Adjusted Birth Index and the Spending Wave. In order for a product or service to profit from the aging of the Baby Boomers, it needs to have a peak age of late 50s or older. Remember, the largest cohort of the Baby Boomers has already passed the age of 50. So unless a product appeals to a consumer close to the age of 60 or (preferably) later, you’ve already missed the Boomer wave. The next great generation is Generation Y, also known as the Echo Boomers or the Millennial generation. The largest cohort of this gen- eration just passed the age of 20, so products with a peak demand age of late 20s to early 40s have an excellent demographic forecast in front of them.

These are really your two best avenues for growth. You either ori- ent your business to sell to the wave or aging Boomers or you orient your business to sell to their children, who are starting their careers and the family formation cycle. And if your product or service is a “tweener” that appeals to an age group other than the Boomers or the Echo Boomers, you might have some difficult choices to make in the very near future.

Based on the Immigration-Adjusted Birth Index, we have lean times coming. This may come as a surprise to you if you’ve been following the news or if you have children that are at or near college age. There has been talk of a “college tuition bubble” and with good reason. In 2012, the total balance of student loans outstanding rose higher than credit card debt for the first time in history. 7 And last year college seniors graduated with the highest debt levels in history with an average of nearly $27,000, 8 though debts of well over $100,000 are not uncommon for students with graduate degrees or even undergraduate degrees at the most prestigious schools.

Money talks. And for all the headlines you see about delinquency and low educational attainment in the United States, a record num- ber of young Americans have earned a bachelor’s degree. In fact, 33% of all 25-to-29-year-olds have a bachelor’s degree, and fully 63% have completed some amount of college. That is nearly double the rate of the 1970s. 11 This is yet another reason why I am optimistic about the future. The young people of today will be the innovators that lead the next great technology boom of the 2020s.

The peak in Echo Boomers turning 18 —the year that most start college — peaked in 2008 and started a seven-year decline. The num- ber of 18-year-olds coming down the pipeline starts to pick up again in 2015 and continues well into the 2020s. So, if you do intend to launch or expand a business that caters to a college clientele (think everything from bars to smoothie shops in college towns) or if you intend to invest in student housing, the time to do it would be within the next 2–3 years. You shouldn’t overpay, of course, but if you can find an opportunity to buy from a developer or business owner who overextended themselves during the boom and is willing to cut a deal, then you should by all means take advantage of the opportunity.

For entrepreneurs, this is a great opportunity, and I have another section dedicated to it. But the key takeaway from this chapter is that the wave of babies that crested in 2007 means there is a wave of 5-year olds this year in 2013... and thus a wave of 18-year olds coming in 2025. This means big demand for primary and second- ary education for years to come and for all of the industries that support education.

There is an old expression that the three rules that every real es- tate buyer should consider are “location, location and location.” I won’t argue with this colloquial wisdom, but I will add to it. Loca- tion should not just be thought of as neighborhood or a prestigious zip code. Instead, think of location as where demographic trends are driving people. This is the single most important rule of real estate investment and ultimately the only one that matters. Strong demo- graphic trends can create inflation in certain areas of the market even in an environment of broad-based deflation. But you have to make sure that you are on the right side of this. It will make the difference between profitable investment and financial ruin.

It is not that rental apartment demand will shrink, per se, but rather that its rate of growth will slow, at least at the national level. The cities experiencing the most growth and attracting the greatest number of new graduates may continue to enjoy a healthy rental market for years to come.

Bottom line: Stay away from the McMansion mar- ket. And if you are thinking of downsizing to a smaller home, do it now rather than later as the larger home is likely to depreciate more than the smaller home in the years and decade ahead.

I would say that it is a little late in the game to be investing in vacation and resort homes as well, or at least those that do not cater to a retired crowd. As I discussed earlier in the commentary on Figure 2.3, vacation home spending has an initial peak at age 49, which the Baby Boomers have now passed. But the one area that could still benefit from Boomer spending is the retirement home market, which peaks at 67, and, to some extent, townhomes that are located closer to downtown areas.

We have two seemingly contradictory trends happening at the same time. After decades of urban decay, many American cities are “reurbanizing” with new residential and retail development tailored to a mostly high-income crowd of singles, marrieds without children, marrieds who can afford private school, and empty nesters. But at the same time, there is demand at the fringes of the city for both young families and active empty nesters who want a property that comes with a recreational lifestyle.

The next major threshold for the Echo Boomers is the purchase of a starter home, which happens around the ages of 29–33, or

as soon as you can afford it after having kids. The first wave of Echo Boomers is already in the early stages of a starter home boom that will extend into 2021–2022, but the difficult economy brings headwinds. The second wave will see its starter home boom in a better economy from around 2029 into 2038–2039.

Demographic trends suggest that demand for bicycles should be strong for the next several years. Think back to the Immigration- Adjusted Birth Index. Subtracting 34 years from 2013 would put us in 1979, at the very tail end of Generation X and just before the birth explosion of the Echo Boomers. The number of Americans in their 30s will be rising for a long time to come.

If you work in the traditional publishing business, it may be time to pursue other options. A good editor can work as a freelancer for newly independent authors, and there will continue to be demand for marketing consultants, agents, and other middlemen that can help authors reach their goals. But you will be fighting for those jobs with the legions of unemployed editors from the large publishing houses that will continue to downsize in the years ahead. Frankly, this is a terrible business to be in.

I’ve painted a rather bleak picture of media industries, and I hope you take my warnings seriously. It is generally a mistake to stake your future on a highly competitive industry that also happens to be in a major state of flux. As a general rule, media businesses are best avoided.

In any event, mattresses should be a fairly stable business in the years ahead. Family formation by the Echo Boomers should lead a broad-based rally, whereas trade-up buying by the Baby Boomers should continue for the remainder of this decade. Again, any new shocks to the housing market or to the economy will hurt bed sales. When money is tight, buying a luxurious new bed is not a high priority. But as far as the furniture market goes, mat- tresses are not a bad product area for the years ahead.

Th e outlook for kitchen and dining room furniture looks a lit- tle better (Figure 5.8). Demand rises sharply into the late 30s and has a peak around age 46, meaning that the Baby Boomers already peaked in their spending here and the damage from their aging is already done. And the upward slope from 20 to 40 is far steeper than the downward slope from 40 to older. So, if you own a furni- ture store or are considering making an investment in the industry, it makes sense to orient your inventory to the tastes and preferences of the Echo Boomers. For the next 15–20 years, they are going to be your primary clientele.

This implies that, all else being equal in the housing market, de- mand should remain relatively high for appliances for the next sev- eral years. The drop-off in demand from the Baby Boomers will not happen for another few years, while demand should rise from Echo Boomers who are starting their family lives. Moreover, there may also be pent-up demand from purchases that were postponed due to the bad economy of the past five years. The advent of “smart appliances” that are connected to your home’s Wi-Fi network also create interesting opportunities. Younger consumers are more comfortable with technology and with sharing personal information over the Internet, so Internet-enabled appli- ances should be an area of high growth in the years to come. Imagine being able to preheat your oven or to start a hot bath remotely from your smartphone using an iPhone or an Android app. The possibili- ties here are endless. I have no specific recommendations as to which jobs or invest- ment opportunities to pursue, but I would encourage you to brain- storm ways that you can profit from one of the major consumer trends of the coming decade: the networking of the American house and its appliances. If nothing else, network monitoring could be a profitable service business with regular, annuity-like income.

For the aspiring entrepreneur, I see plenty of opportunities in the decade ahead in the furniture and appliances sphere. But the most promising development in my view is the smart, Internet enabled ap- pliance and the possibilities for an automated house that this creates. Much like home security systems, networks need to be monitored. If you are technologically savvy, exploring business models based on this might have a lot of potential.

Overall, the trend here is not positive. To the extent that retail- ers have success here, it will be due to their ability to reach the Echo Boomers as they enter the marriage and family formation stage. Think of the next few years as being an investment in the future. The retail- ers that appeal to the up-and-coming Echo Boomers will benefit from years of rising growth. But those that depend on the tastes of aging Baby Boomers should see years of disappointing sales in front of them.

While there is variation among home products, the large ma- jority have peak spending years that are very close to the peak for overall spending. Th is means that most of these products should follow the path of the Spending Wave, which means moribund demand for the next several years. To the best extent you can, it makes sense to reorient your business to prepare for the maturing of the Echo Boomers. You will have several lean years in front of you, but if you survive, you will be well placed for the boom to follow in the next decade.

Repair of household appliances (Figure 7.2) is also a booming business well into our 70s. After our peak spending years, we are far less likely to spend money on new white goods like washing machines and refrigerators. But we are defi nitely likely to repair what we already own after it breaks.

There are a couple major points to take away from this. First, all else being equal, major remodeling will not be a good business to be in going forward. Baby Boomer spending will start declining signifi- cantly in a few years, and the Echo Boomers will not be taking up the slack any time soon.

So, if you are an electrician, your services will not necessarily be in decline, but you might want to broaden the services you off er. Instead of focusing solely on the electrical system, consider mov- ing to a related area, such as installing home security systems. Or, consider using your skills to modernize older homes by installing the cabling for home networks for use with Internet-enabled TVs and other entertainment devices. With your core electrician ser- vice off ering mediocre growth prospects, you will want to explore alternatives.

For most investors, this is not going to be an investable theme. Trash collection is a utility service that is typically provided by the city or municipal government. Th at said, there may be opportunities here if you have a way to reduce the government’s costs.

pension and healthcare liabilities many local governments face for their aging workforces —there may be opportunities for privatiza- tion. Larger firms like Waste Management will be the primary ben- eficiaries, but a crafty entrepreneur might find a niche opportunity here, particularly in a smaller city or town that might be off the radar of a larger company. Water softening services (Figure 7.17) have an excellent demo- graphic profile. Demand continues to rise well into our 70s, and is particularly steep in the 20s and early 30s. This means that both the Baby Boomers and the Echo Boomers will be significant contributors to growing demand. Furthermore, any improvement in the housing market should be a beneficial tailwind for this industry.

Finally, we get to furniture repair, refurnishing and reupholstery (Figure 7.23). Demand for these services peaks after the age of 60, implying that the Baby Boomers may prove to be a big source of new demand for this sleepy industry. As the empty nester Baby Boomers downsize from their large suburban homes and make major changes in their lives, some will choose to give their old furniture a facelift. This is a niche market and not a particularly easy one for an inexpe- rienced entrepreneur to exploit. But I do expect it to do well in the years ahead.

Less driving means lower fuel consumption, which means less traffi c for gas stations. But there are also knock-on eff ects. Gas stations earn most of their profi ts from the convenience stores inside that sell every- thing from cigarettes and beer, to lunchmeat and juice. Lower traffi c to the gas stations also means fewer convenience store purchases. And

get progressively stronger from now until 2018–2019. And on a 3–4-year lag, I would expect a boom in higher-end “professional class” instruments. The dollar signs here will shock parents who have never played an instrument. The cost of a typical Selmer alto saxophone will often run well over $5,000, and you might have to mortgage your house if your child takes to the tuba or cello. Professional-caliber instruments such as these can be more expensive than a car. But beyond the instruments themselves, there are the supporting industries such as private lessons. Parents will spend $20 for a half hour lesson, and more for the most sought-after instructors. This is not a business opportunity that just anyone can participate in. Professional expertise and connoisseurship are required. But for those of you with the skills and knowledge, there should be opportu- nities in all businesses related to musical instruments.

With that said, let’s jump back into demographic forecasting. Demand for paid babysitting (Figure 9.4) is concentrated in the mid-30s and peaks around 34 just as the average kid born at age 28–29 is entering elementary school. Th e real boom in babysit- ting is still a few years away. But the surge in births leading up to 2007 means that demand should still be quite high in the interim.

I don’t know that there is much in the way of a business op- portunity here, but retiring Baby Boomers may fi nd that watching their neighbors’ children is an easy source of supplemental income. And forward-looking entrepreneurs could use the next several years as a testing period for a babysitting or nanny service with the un- derstanding that the real money will be made in the late 2010s and 2020s when the next great baby boom gets underway.

Th e key to take away here is this: Once the new baby boom gets underway, you will have plenty of advanced notice to put a plan in place for profi ting from the next stage of childhood development.

What are the key points to take away from this chapter? Th e clothing and accessories markets for men and women are complete- ly dominated by consumers in their late 40s and early 50s. Th is was fantastic news when the Baby Boomers were entering this stage of their lives. But now that they have passed it, it is a nightmare sce- nario for retailers.

So, unless your specialty is selling to the late 20s or early 30s de- mographics (i.e., today’s Echo Boomers), clothing and accessories are terrible businesses to be in. If your career is in this industry, you might want to seriously consider a career change. If that is not pos- sible for you, do what you can to keep your overhead low and keep

“Travel and leisure” is a broad category, and spending on some items peaks earlier than others. But as a general rule, Americans are still active travelers well into their 50s and often into their 60s. And Americans who travel at those ages tend to spend a lot more money than 20-something backpackers or young families.

Opportunities here are almost limitless. There will be demand for everything from golf pros to massage therapists. A travel-oriented business might be an ideal “semi-retirement” project for a Boom- er who wants to continue working and earning an income but for whom office life has become unappealing.

couple points should be made here. First, as dentists are less de- pendent on insurance than doctors, their practices offer better stabil- ity. They are not immune from macroeconomic risk — when money is tight, Americans might go longer between teeth cleanings or forego non-urgent dental work. But overall, this is a profession that is resilient to changing demographic trends.

Overall, the best opportunities in medicine in the next decade will be in fi nding ways to cut costs without reducing the quality of care. Th is is easier said than done, and I have no easy or obvious answers for you. Th e problem is there. It’s up to you to fi nd the solution.

I’m not being defeatist when I say that these debts will never be paid back. They won’t be. It’s the honest truth, and anyone who says to the contrary is either delusional or a charlatan. The only way they can be “paid back” would be through debt monetization by the Fed- eral Reserve, in which the Fed essentially “forgave” the outstanding amounts on the bonds it holds. But this brings with it a whole new set of problems, such as potential currency collapse.
